hey this is pressure Locker you roll a
fair dice until you get a six what is
the expected number of roles including
the role of six conditioned on the event
that all previous roles were even
numbers this problem is difficult even
for mathematicians it was posted to Gil
collides blog combinatorics and more
which generally covers graduate level
mathematics over a thousand people
guessed what the answer would be from a
list of possible answer choices only
about 18% got the correct answer
furthermore over 50% of this
mathematically educated audience guessed
the same wrong answer choice the problem
is quite counterintuitive I also want to
mention one more point whenever I make
videos like this I get comments and
emails that dice is a plural word and
die is the correct singular the people
who write these comments and emails care
about grammar but they are not familiar
with modern usage of the word dice
according to the Oxford English
Dictionary historically dice is the
plural of die but in modern Standard
English dice is both the singular and
the plural in this video I will be using
dice as the singular with that context
in mind can you figure out this problem
give this puzzle a try and when you're
ready keep watching the video for the
solution before I get to the solution
let me go over the answer it is three
halves or 1.5 rolls
now the most common incorrect answer
choice was three rolls so why do people
think three was the correct answer when
you roll a dice there are six possible
outcomes out of these one of them is a
six so the probability of getting six is
one six and you can calculate that the
expected number of rolls to a six will
be the reciprocal of that which is one
over one six or six in other words as
the probability of rolling six is 1/6 we
expect that it'll take six rolls to get
a six on average so what many people
thought with this puzzle is that the
probability of rolling a six when you
have an even role will be one third
there are three even numbers 2 4 & 6 and
the probability of rolling a 6 given
that it's even is 1 out of these three
possibilities so they use the logic that
the expected number of rolls to a six
given an even roll would be the
reciprocal of this which is 1 over 1/3
and that would be three rolls but this
is not the correct answer because the
puzzle is asking for a slightly
different question it's asking for the
expected number of rolls to six given
that there are even rolls before the six
this is a slightly different question
and I'm going to show you why the answer
is 1.5 so when you roll a dice there are
six possible outcomes we need every
single roll to be an even number and the
first roll could be a two for example
then we roll the dice again and we have
six possibilities and we need this again
to be an even number so let's say it's a
four when we roll the dice again there's
six possibilities and let's say we get a
six now the sequence will terminate we
have a two four and six and that's it so
we'll be considering sequences of this
form in other words were rolling even
numbers which are twos and fours until
we roll a six the sequence of rolls we
will be considering will have the form e
comma Y comma so on until the role of
six
and in this case e is equal to two or
four but what's special about six
imagine we're old until we got a one if
we only had rolls of twos and fours
until we got a one the sequence of rolls
would be e e all the way into one and
notice the sequence length would have
exactly the same distribution because
rolling until a six is exactly the same
as rolling until a one because six had
one occur with the same probability
but then there's nothing special to the
role of one we could also do the same
thing until we roll until at three if we
have only twos or fours until a sequence
terminates in at three this would have
exactly the same distribution as the
other sequences of rolling Tier one or
rolling to six and the same thing for
rolling until we have the five so what
does this mean is that we're looking at
sequences where we have twos or fours
until we roll any other number which
could be one three five or six so the
question is what's the expected rolls 2x
or what's the expected length of this
sequence which I'll denote L we can
figure this out from a logical
consideration if we roll one three five
or six in the very first row that's four
out of six possibilities then the length
of the sequence will be one but if we do
not roll that that means we rolled a two
or a four in the first roll in that case
we wasted one roll and then we still
expect to roll just as many times until
we end in a one three five or six this
is a memoryless distribution after we
have wasted the first roll we're still
going to expect a length of L to get our
sequence to terminate so this will be
the second half of the expectation
so now we can substitute in the
probabilities that the first role is X
that'll be four out of six possibilities
and the probability of the first role is
not X which will be two out of the six
possibilities which is two or four so we
now have an equation for L we can solve
this equation for L and we'll end up
getting that L is equal to 6 sports
which simplifies to be three-halves or
1.5 brawls and that's the correct answer
so if this explanation wasn't
satisfactory you I'm going to provide
another way that you can get the answer
we can directly calculate the
expectation using the definition of a
conditional expectation so let's
calculate the expected number of rolls
until a six given that they're only
rolls of two and four before we roll to
the six in this problem we can write the
conditional expectation as follows we
have the expected rolls to six and we
have only two or four rolls for the N
minus one rolls until we get the six and
we're going to divide this by the entire
event where we only have two or four
rolls until we get a six in some role
either the first roll of a second roll
the third role and so on so I'll first
expand out the numerator into summation
form and now let's calculate the
denominator we need to know the
probability that we get only twos and
fours before we roll a six in some roll
this will be the sum from 1 to infinity
of the probability that we're all 6 in
roll K times the probability we only get
twos or fours before roll cake which
will be the rolls all the way up to K
minus 1 now the probability that we roll
6 in any particular role will be 1/6 and
then the probability that we roll only 2
is a force up to that role will be the
probability 2 over 6 which simplifies to
be 1/3 all the way for each of the K
minus 1 rolls before we get the six
so now how do we calculate this infinite
series we can write out several of the
terms and now we have a geometric
sequence on the right this starts with
the term 1 it has a common ratio of 1/3
so we can calculate its sum by the
formula a divided by the quantity 1
minus R substituting in those terms we
get 1 divided by the quantity 1 minus
1/3 which will simplify and simplify
again and now we can figure out that the
probability we only get 2 or 4 rolls
before we roll a 6 is equal to 1/4 so
this becomes the denominator and now
we're dividing by 1/4 which will mean
that we're multiplying by 4 we now have
to figure out this summation but we've
already calculated some of these
probabilities the probability that we
roll a 6 on any particular roll is 1/6
and the probability that we get 2 or 4
up to that role will again be the
product of 1/3 to the power of n minus 1
so now let's factor out the 1/6 from the
summation and write out some of the
terms of this summation so how do we
figure out this sum well it turns out
this is kind of like a geometric series
but it's being multiplied by increasing
terms so it's known as an arithmetic Oh
geometric series and it is a common
ratio of 1/3 so because the common ratio
is between negative 1 and 1 it's a
property of a rip medico geometric
series that it'll converge so I'm going
to tell you this sum converges and now
I'm going to show you how you can
evaluate this sum s it's going to be
very similar to solving a geometric
series we'll multiply the entire
summation by the common ratio of 1/3
if you
look at what this will have been turned
by term on the right hand side will
essentially shift over the summation one
term to the right we can now subtract
the second equation from the first and
we'll cancel out all of these terms so
we have the sum times two-thirds which
will be equal to essentially one term of
each of these factors of 1 over 3 to the
power of something so what we've done is
we've turned our arithmetic oh geometric
series into a standard geometric series
this has a common ratio of 1/3 and it
starts with 1 so we can use the formula
for the sum of a geometric series we
then simplify this formula and then
simplify again and then we end up with s
times 2/3 is equal to 1 and now we take
the reciprocal of 2/3 which ends up
being three-halves so we figured out
once again that this expectation is
equal to three-halves or one and a half
roles did you figure out this
counterintuitive puzzle thanks for
watching please subscribe to my channel
I make videos on math you can catch me
on my blog mind your decisions which you
can follow on Facebook Google+ and
patreon you can catch me on social media
at pressure Locker and if you like this
video please check out my books there
are links in the video description